[UDF docs] Volatility + Type (#8070)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/resource-configs/volatility.md

---
title: volatility
sidebar_label: "volatility"
id: volatility
---
<VersionCallout version="1.11" /> 

<File name='functions/<filename>.yml'>

```yml
functions:
  - name: <function name>
    config:
      volatility: deterministic | stable | non-deterministic
```

</File>

## Definition

The `volatility` config is an optional config that describes how predictable a UDF’s output is. Warehouses use this to decide if results can be cached, reordered, or inlined. Setting the appropriate volatility helps prevent incorrect results when a function isn’t safe to cache or reorder.

By default, dbt does not specify a volatility value. If you don’t set volatility, dbt generates a `CREATE` statement without a volatility keyword, and the warehouse’s default behavior applies.

## Supported volatility types

### deterministic

A deterministic function always returns the same output for the same input. Because its results are predictable, the warehouse can safely apply aggressive optimizations and caching.

### stable

> A stable function returns the same value throughout a single query execution, but its result may change across different executions.

Reviewer: We should maybe mention here that stable is not supported by all warehouses

---
title: volatility
sidebar_label: "volatility"
id: volatility
---
<VersionCallout version="1.11" /> 

<File name='functions/<filename>.yml'>

```yml
functions:
  - name: <function name>
    config:
      volatility: deterministic | stable | non-deterministic
```

</File>

## Definition

> The `volatility` config is an optional config that describes how predictable a UDF’s output is. Warehouses use this to decide if results can be cached, reordered, or inlined. Setting the appropriate volatility helps prevent incorrect results when a function isn’t safe to cache or reorder.

Reviewer 2: I suggest making this active and possibly adding a short example to convey the importance of this feature. Maybe something like this? Please check with @graciegoheen or @QMalcolm that my "example" is useful. Maybe they know of a better use case that we should talk about. 

```suggestion
You can optionally use the `volatility` config to describe how predictable the user-defined function (UDF) output is by using deterministic, stable, or non-deterministic. Warehouses use this information to decide if results can be cached, reordered, or inlined. Setting the appropriate volatility helps prevent incorrect results when a function isn’t safe to cache or reorder. For example, if you create a function for `today()` and set `volatility` to `deterministic`, the warehouse assumes `today()`never changes and might cache it and use yesterday's date even if you run the query today. 
```

By default, dbt does not specify a volatility value. If you don’t set volatility, dbt generates a `CREATE` statement without a volatility keyword, and the warehouse’s default behavior applies &mdash; except in Redshift. In Redshift, dbt sets `non-deterministic` (`VOLATILE`) by default if no volatility is specified, because Redshift requires an explicit volatility and `VOLATILE` is the safest assumption.

import Volatility from '/snippets/_warehouse-volatility.md';

<Volatility />

## Supported volatility types

> ### deterministic

Reviewer 2: I suggest either capitalizing these H3s or adding backticks

### `deterministic`  or 

### Deterministic

> A deterministic function always returns the same output for the same input. Because its results are predictable, the warehouse can safely apply aggressive optimizations and caching.

Reviewer 2: Please provide an example of a deterministic function! I think last name / first name are pretty deterministic?

### stable

> A stable function returns the same value throughout a single query execution, but its result may change across different executions. Not supported by all warehouses. For more information, see [Warehouse-specific volatility keywords](/reference/resource-configs/volatility#warehouse-specific-volatility-keywords).

Reviewer 2: This could also. use an example but not sure what a good one is. Maybe current user? or query start time?

### non-deterministic

> A non-deterministic function may return different results for the same inputs. Warehouses should not cache these results or reorder expressions in ways that assume stability.

Reviewer 2: Maybe a random number generator would be a good exmaple here?

---
title: volatility
sidebar_label: "volatility"
id: volatility
---
<VersionCallout version="1.11" /> 

<File name='functions/<filename>.yml'>

```yml
functions:
  - name: <function name>
    config:
      volatility: deterministic | stable | non-deterministic
```

</File>

## Definition

import VolatilityDefinition from '/snippets/_volatility-definition.md';

<VolatilityDefinition />

By default, dbt does not specify a volatility value. If you don’t set volatility, dbt generates a `CREATE` statement without a volatility keyword, and the warehouse’s default behavior applies &mdash; except in Redshift. In Redshift, dbt sets `non-deterministic` (`VOLATILE`) by default if no volatility is specified, because Redshift requires an explicit volatility and `VOLATILE` is the safest assumption.

import Volatility from '/snippets/_warehouse-volatility.md';

<Volatility />

## Supported volatility types

> ### `deterministic`

Author: Added examples per type (lines 37, 43, 49). @QMalcolm @graciegoheen requesting your tech review here.

Reviewer: I worry these examples are confusing. I feel like the volatility we're talking about is the volatility of `concat`, and concat is _always_ deterministic. I think where the confusion stems from is what's actually being passed to `concat`. In the second and third example, we are _calling_ `session_user()` and `random()` to _create_ the argument to be passed to `concat`, we aren't actually passing those functions to the `concat` function.

However if we _wrap_ the `concat` in a function itself, then we get the volatility described. Say we create three different user_name functions
```sql
# username1.sql
concat(first_name, ' ', last_name)
```

```sql
# username2.sql
concat(user_session(), ' ', last_name)
```

```sql
# username3.sql
concat(random(), ' ', last_name)
```

The UDF `username1` takes two arguments, `first_name` and `last_name`, and will always return the same result given the same arguments. Thus it is deterministic

The UDF `username2` takes one argument, `last_name`, and will always return the same result within a given query if the same `last_name` is provided. Thus it is stable.

The UDF `username3` takes one argument, `last_name`, and will mostly always return a different result even if the same `last_name` is provided (the exception being that _sometimes_ random will produce duplicates). Thus it is non-deterministic.

Reviewer: A simpler way to do these examples might be to just reference the examples from the `| Value | Description | Example |` table

Author: Modified here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/8070/commits/753774777dbece4be197a52df44563076d5576a3
